add: metadata protocol (#26)
worldbank/wb-reproducible-research-repository: metadata_protocol.md

# Metadata Protocol for Reproducibility Packages

This protocol outlines the steps and field requirements for creating high-quality metadata for reproducibility packages. It ensures that entries published on the [Reproducible Research Repository](https://reproducibility.worldbank.org) are consistent, complete, and aligned with verification standards.

> The protocol has three components:
> 
> 1. **Process Description** – How metadata is created and published.
> 2. **Metadata Fields** – Detailed guidance on each field, indicating which are pre-filled.
> 3. **External Resources Structure** – The required folder structure accompanying the package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol has four components:

1. **Process Description** – How metadata is created and published.
2. **Metadata Fields** – Detailed guidance on each field, indicating which are pre-filled.
3. **External Resources Structure** – The required folder structure accompanying the package.
4. **Post-Publication Updates** – Fields to review or revise after metadata creation and publication.
```

* The reviewer opens the app, selects the package to publish, assigns their name, and clicks **Publish JSON** to generate the metadata entry in the Metadata Editor.

### Steps

1. **Go to the app** – Select the entry you want to publish.
2. **Generate JSON** – Publish the package JSON from the app to the Metadata Editor.

<img src="img/app_flow.png" alt="App Flow" width="500"/>

3. **Review and Edit Metadata** – In the Metadata Editor:

   * Verify auto-filled fields (detailed guidance in the next section).
   * Complete the **Data section** with dataset provenance and access statements.
   * Upload **External resources**: README, reproducibility report, license, data hash report, and optional comparison report.
   * Check that **tags** (DOI, Data Access, Code Access) are correctly defined.
4. **Publish to QA** – Save and publish the entry to the QA catalog.
5. **TTL Review** – Send the QA link to the TTL for approval.
6. **Publish to Production** – After TTL approval, finalize publication in PROD.

---

## Metadata Fields

### Auto-Filled Fields

Review and correct these fields as needed:

* **Metadata Information**

>   * **Producers**: `Reproducibility WBG, DECDI, World Bank - Development Impact Department, Verification and preparation of metadata`

Reviewer 2: I added it here: https://github.com/dime-worldbank/wb-reproducible-research-repository-automation/commit/02d6a73025c4f7574ff31771627edf951d5ddccc
we're waiting for Marina to uypdate the app with the change

  * **License**: Add license type if available (not pre-filled).
  * **Language**: English.

* **Access and Rights**

  * **Disclaimer**: Ensure it is not “Default”; publish the actual text.
  * **License**: `Modified BSD3` with URL: [https://opensource.org/license/bsd-3-clause/](https://opensource.org/license/bsd-3-clause/).

* **Contacts**: Prefilled with main authors and the reproducibility team. Verify accuracy.

* **Methods, Software, and Scripts**

  * **Software**: Add version number (e.g., Stata 18.0 MP).
  * **Scripts**: Prefilled but verify:

    * File name and ZIP package match ID (e.g., `RR_URY_2025_400.zip`).
    * Title matches “Reproducibility package for \[Paper Title]”.
    * Dependencies reference ado folder / `renv.lock` / `requirements.txt`.
    * Notes include: “Computational reproducibility verified by the Development Impact Analytics Team, World Bank.”

* **Repository**: Usually “Reproducible Research Repository (World Bank)” with URL [https://reproducibility.worldbank.org](https://reproducibility.worldbank.org). Update only if replication was hosted by a journal or another repository.

---

> ### Manual Input Fields: Data Section

Reviewer 2: for more context, I initially wanted to write the guide as instructions for Xuerong and Nihaa to help with registering the datasets' metadata, but then it took me so long that Xuerong finished her work with us, and it wasn't ready yet.

- `Reproducibility package/` folder containing the original code and data (e.g., `ado` folder for Stata, `renv` or `myenv` for R/Python).

![](img/package_structure.png)

> **Note:** Place `README.pdf`, `LICENSE.txt`, `reproducibility_report_PID.pdf`, `data_hash_report.csv`, and `comparison_report.csv` at the **top level** of the ZIP file, not inside the `Reproducibility Package` folder, for immediate visibility. 

---

### Tags

Ensure tags are added and correct:

* **DOI**: DOI number.
* **Data Access**:

  * Open data: freely downloadable and redistributable.
  * Accessible data: freely downloadable but cannot be redistributed (e.g., MDL public use).
  * Limited-access data: requires purchase or human approval (e.g., MDL licensed data).
  * Restricted data: no documented access method or requires ad-hoc agreements.
* **Code Access**:

  * Open code: code included and accessible.
  * Restricted code: proprietary or not included (temporary embargo counts as restricted).
  * No code: package includes only manual (e.g., Excel) processes.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Post-Publication Updates

Once the paper is published or the data embargo is lifted, the following updates should be made to ensure the metadata remains accurate and complete:

1. **Thumbnail**  
   Replace the existing thumbnail with a screenshot of the *published* version of the paper.

2. **Output Section**  
   Update the following fields under the *Processes and Outputs* section:
   - **Description**: Add the publication number, e.g., *Policy Research Working Paper (PRWP) No. 11165*.
   - **URL**: Link to the final published paper.
   - **DOI**: Enter the DOI provided at publication.

3. **Data Section**  
   - If data previously marked as *forthcoming* is now available, verify that it matches the version originally included in the reproducibility package. Then update the dataset’s **URL** and **notes** fields accordingly.
   - If an embargo has been lifted, update the dataset’s **URL** and **notes** fields accordingly.

   
```
